Installation
============

Preparing for pyUSID
--------------------
`PyUSID <https://github.com/pycroscopy/pyUSID>`_ requires many commonly used scientific and numeric python packages such as numpy, h5py etc.
To simplify the installation process, we recommend the installation of Anaconda which contains most of the prerequisite packages,
`conda <https://conda.io/docs/>`_ - a package / environment manager,
as well as an `interactive development environment <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_development_environment>`_ - `Spyder <https://www.coursera.org/learn/python-programming-introduction/lecture/ywcuv/introduction-to-the-spyder-ide>`_.

Do you already have Anaconda installed?

- No? `Download and install Anaconda <https://www.anaconda.com/download/>`_ for Python 3.6

- Yes? Is your Anaconda based on python 2.7, 3.4+?

  - No? Uninstall existing Python / Anaconda distribution(s). Restart computer afterwards.
  - Yes? Proceed to install pyUSID

Compatibility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* Development on pyUSID is on python 3.5+. Nonetheless, we will do our best to ensure continued compatibility with python 2. Please raise an issue if you find a bug.
* We do not support 32 bit architectures
* We only support text that is UTF-8 compliant due to restrictions posed by HDF5
   
Installing pyUSID
---------------------
Once the appropriate Anaconda distribution has been successfully installed, pyUSID can be installed easily from the python package index (pypi) via pip.

pip installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Open a terminal (mac / linux) or command prompt (windows - be sure to install in a location where you have write access.  Don't install as administrator unless you are required to do so.) and type:
   	
.. code:: bash

  pip install pyUSID
  
conda installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
pyUSID is a pure python package and is currently only available via pip

  
Installing from a specific branch (advanced users **ONLY**)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here, we are installing pyUSID from the latest development branch. Note that we do not recommend installing pyUSID this way.

Before you can install pyUSID, you need to install git.

.. code:: bash

  conda install git

Once git has installed, you can install a specific branch of pyUSID (``dev`` in this case):

.. code:: bash

  pip install -U git+https://github.com/pycroscopy/pyUSID@dev

  
Updating pyUSID
-------------------

We recommend periodically updating your conda / anaconda distribution. Please see `these instructions to update anaconda <./external_guides.html#Updating-packages>`_.

If you already have pyUSID installed and want to update to the latest version, use the following command in a terminal / command window:

.. code:: bash

  pip install -U --no-deps pyUSID
  
If it does not work try reinstalling the package:

.. code:: bash

  pip uninstall pyUSID
  pip install pyUSID


Other software
--------------
We recommend `HDF View <https://support.hdfgroup.org/products/java/hdfview/>`_ for exploring HDF5 files generated by and used in pyUSID.
